---
layout: single
classes: wide
title: "Appendix 8-C: The World of Tohu and the World of Tiqun"
author: "Yitzhaq Hayut-Man, Ph.D"
date: 2010-03-12 7:05:00 +0200
categories: regenesis
---

Tohuworld.doc	06,06,02
The World of Tohu and the World of Tiqun*

Rabbi Adin Even-Yisra’el/Steinsalz

Among the first words of the Bible (Genesis 1:2) we have: "And the earth was without form and void". The Hebrew expression "Tohu" (without form) has a more extensive meaning in the writings of the Kabbalah, where it denotes the World of chaos or original substance and energy that preceded Genesis. It was only with the collapse of this World of Tohu that our world, the World of Tiqun (Restitution, often spelled “Tikun”), could come into existence. But the confrontation between the primal disorder and the amended order continues as a fundamental feature of reality.
The World of Tohu is also known as the realm of the broken vessels, from where evil comes. In this world preceding our own world, everything is jumbled together in its primeval state, and the parts are unable to combine or even to ease the friction between them.
The "kings" (see Genesis 36:31-39) of this World of Tohu fall and break because they are too complete in themselves; they are unable to unite or make real contact with anything outside themselves. They are unyielding and unstable. There are too many Lights ("Orot") and too few Vessels ("Kelim"). In the World of Tiqun, however, there are fewer Lights and Vessels. Thus, in the World of Tohu the Vessels shatter from an excess of Light, which they are unable to contain. As in our own domain of ordinary things, when too much is poured into a "container" of any kind, it is liable to crack. When an idea has not the words to express it, we stutter. When anything exceeds its vehicle, there is danger of explosion.

Thus, in the World of Tohu, the Divine Sefirot vessels or Kelim) not only cannot relate one to another, they cannot even support themselves. The Lights must remove them-selves from the Vessels and they become the encompassing aspect of reality. Since the encompassing light cannot find its expression within the Vessels of reality, it has to remain beyond it. Without an appropriate vessel to connect it, the Light cannot be expressed in any inner expression. It exists only as an influence that has no particular channel of expression.

The catastrophe of the Vessels breaking and falling also influenced the Lights, which, unable to penetrate the Vessels, had to remain outside. The broken Vessels became fragments and fell into the lower world. But these same Vessels also belong to a higher world. Although insufficient to hold the vastness and intensity of the Divine Light, the shattered fragments are sufficient to constitute the raw material for a lower world. Indeed, what we know as our universe is really the remnants of the broken Vessels of the World of Tohu (the Primordial Chaos). It is these fragments that constitute the World of Tiqun, a shattered world that has to be corrected or reconstituted. Each fragment has its own force and individuality, but it no longer serves its original purpose; it is a broken vessel in every sense of the term. The fragments have become meaningless pieces of substance, of a quality that is destined to become weeds and stumbling blocks.

When a person experiences such a "fall", his light too is shattered, and what remains is a distorted self. He has to try to put together what was broken, for he is now in the World of Tiqun and his task is restitution. Esau, the unfortunate brother of Jacob, became "wicked" as a result of such a falling. He was originally of a higher essence and was referred to as the bigger or older brother. And this too precisely because he came from the World of Tohu, which indicates that the primary root of evil in Tohu is higher than the root of goodness in Tiqun.

To be sure, the matter is far more complex than any simple chart of higher and lower. For the world of Tohu is vast beyond comprehension, and correspondingly powerful, so that even the smallest fragments of its broken Vessels considerable residue of force. The secret of this enormous force is in the intrinsic quality of Tohu as one-dimensional singleness of pure being. The parts cannot me or make any kind of merger or unity with other parts. The world of Tiqun, however, is characterized by its capacity to make combinations of the most intricate and varied sort. Thus, the remnants of the World of Tohu have a rather terrible definiteness about them, a monomania, and an inability to be anything else. This is apparent in the way inferior forms of life are relatively fixed and rigid in their patterns of behavior when compared to higher forms of life, and of course to man, who belongs to the World of Tiqun. The fragments of primordial Chaos are with us in a great variety of forms. The creatures of Tohu are each splendid in their singleness of function, while man, who is able to combine many factors and reach another kind of wholeness in Tiqun, can never be as swift as the deer, strong as the lion, or light as the eagle.

Thus, the problem of good and evil seems to become focused on the struggle against the residues of Tohu - For man meets up with evil in its multiple variations at every step of his life. And the good impulse, for all its being very decent and sweet, has not much chance against the demonic singleness of purpose of the evil impulse. Would that goodness have such force! All that the good impulse can bring to bear is a certain plasticity and ability to make combinations.

Nevertheless, the very inflexibility of the forces of Tohu and their lack of orientation make them vulnerable. They are like the madness that strikes a person; in spite of its enormous energy, the fit will tend to destroy itself.

The World of Tohu, then, is indeed powerful but it is brittle and easily shattered, whereas the World of Tiqun is stable, able to build itself up and continue its existence in a variety of forms. Thus, when Jacob, the personification of Tiqun, goes forth to meet his brother Esau after many years, he believes that just as he has now become more mature and whole, so too may Esau have developed. In this case, Esau would have become the rightful heir, the firstborn. For the World of Tohu precedes the World of Tiqun, and when it breaks, the World of Tiqun that follows has to repair the damage, make restitution, and correct the mistakes. But if the World of Tohu could make restitution of itself, it would remain the firstborn and the rightful heir. Had Esau reached Tiqun of himself, he would be higher than Jacob. Commentators have been confused about Jacob's humiliating behavior, sending envoys with gifts and the like. The explanation of some Sages is that Jacob did not know whether Esau had attained completeness and maturity of being in the World of Tohu, in which case he would be on a higher plane and worthy of honor.

An ancient tradition concerning the precedence of Tohu lists the "kings that reigned in the Land of Edom before there reigned any king over the children of Yisra’el" (Genesis 36:31). These kings of Edom (Edom is Esau) are lords of Tohu, which are superior realms, but, as Genesis 36:32-39 succinctly tells us, they ruled and died one after the other. Had Esau been able to make proper contact with his original light, their history would have been different. Jacob was aware of the prototype his brother represented, and he even saw the great light behind him, and in this sense, he offered him love and respect. But it was the interiorization of this light that made the World of Tiqun possible, and this is what Jacob accomplished. The World of Restitution and Tiqun (unlike the World of Chaos and Tohu) made fulfillment obtainable.

It seems, then, that there are two types: the man of the field, the exterior person; and the one who sits in tents, the interior man: Esau and Jacob. When they are together in harmony, they raise the world to its completeness. When the encompassing light is in a state of wholeness, it can also illuminate inwardly. The World of Tiqun endeavors to elicit the sources of its own power from the fragments of the World of Tohu, by drawing forth ever more and higher forces.

In Biblical imagery, it is as though Jacob realized that he had completed his Tiqun in the "neutral" world of oxen, donkeys, and servants; he had his wealth, his twelve sons, his honorable place among men. He was now ready to receive another illumination, another kind of Tiqun, from the depths of Tohu, of Chaos itself. He felt that Esau might be the means of bringing him to it. In Chasidic terms, what is being considered is the transition to the higher level of Tiqun, beyond that of control and order, into the ecstatic.
That is to say, the work of restitution in Tiqun comes into its own after the attainment of order and control over life (which take their own time); its completeness is drawn from the encompassing light and power of Tohu itself. But the Tiqun has to proceed in a certain direction; it has to build a life structure and dwell in it. When the design has been somehow completed, the light of Tohu can enter. Otherwise, the Vessel will not be strong enough to hold the light of holiness. This is the essence of the mythical image of the broken Vessels. Man has to be a sturdy and well-built Vessel to receive the wild power of sanctity.

This statement seems to contradict some of the Chasidic notions about the need for a crushed and contrite spirit. But as the Rabbi of Pshische said, "There is nothing more whole and complete than a broken heart". For true blessing cannot enter a damaged or unclean place. Its power is of another order, coming from the outer light of Tohu; it shatters the world of partial Tiqun and only a higher and more whole order of Tiqun can absorb its influence. The present human world is still at a lower level of Tiqun, where things have to be done properly in order to fit in with its limited and defined structure.
Nevertheless, when the world of Tiqun realizes its task and the Vessel is finished, it will be able to contain the power of the World of Tohu. Then a third situation will have been created, higher than either Tohu or Tiqun, a world in which the infinite power of primordial Tohu will be within (controlled by) the perfection of the World of Tiqun. This world is beyond the known and proscribed and substantial, a world in which men are no longer creatures of rigid and finite design but can begin to act as combinations of both the infinite and the finite in a single existence.

Thus, when Jacob went forth to meet his brother Esau with gifts, he was saying, "I have completed my part of the task of Tiqun; now give me your part of the encompassing Light and the Tohu and together we shall bring fulfillment". He had done what had to be done within his domain. The Talmud says that a person should be a sage, a hero, and rich 1 order to receive the gift of prophecy, because the Vessel to contain it has to be whole and sturdy. Even then, a person has to be forever improving himself.

Jacob's messengers returned with the distressing news Esau had not changed. He had remained in the same world and was far from the World of Tiqun; there way of bringing him to restitution. In esoteric terms, the World of Tiqun and the World of Tohu could not do anything about the reality of evil here below. In spite of all he himself had accomplished within; Jacob could not cope with the evil outside himself. The world could not yet be redeemed from its fallen state.

The persistent old question presents itself. Why is the good so limited in its potency? Why is it that when purity touches uncleanness, it becomes unclean? Why shouldn't the unclean rather become purified by the contact? Of course, there are several aspects to the problem. One is that the unclean and evil and all that this world represents are not affected by the World of Tiqun. The World of Tiqun can function only within a very limited sphere. It has its frontiers. It has to be orderly, quiet, understandable, and so on. And only within these prescribed limits can it function at all; so that it also contains prohibitions. Beyond these limits is the realm of evil, where the World of Tiqun cannot move or make contact. There is simply no way of being in touch with evil as evil. Only when evil begins to change, whether of itself or by some other influence, can a process of repentance, or Teshuvah, begin to take place, by which the evil is made to approach and become integrated into the World of Tiqun. So long as evil remains locked within its own sphere of evil, there is no contact with the World of Tiqun.

Consequently, Jacob and Esau have to part. And what does Jacob say to his brother Esau, who proved such a disappointment to him? He tells him that sometime at the end of days he will come to visit him. These words suggest that when the world gets to its utmost completeness, Jacob (Tiqun) will be able to come to Mount Se’ir, where Esau dwells.

It is written that Esau had 400 men to do his bidding. These represent 400 severe judgments (Dinim) or demonic forces that are released when evil is free to act destructively. These forces of evil are essentially parasitic. They are unable to do anything of themselves; they live in a vacuum, in a distorted emptiness and are sustained by the nourishment they get from holiness. And that is the problem-that evil feeds on the good, becoming ever more powerful through this sacred nourishment. As it was said at the very beginning to Cain: "For sin crouches at the door, and to thee shall be his desire. Yet thou mayest rule over him" (Genesis 4:7). Sin not only crouches there waiting, it also loves you and desires you. Because man is its very source of life, sin is a parasite living off of the human.
Indeed, evil's parasitic lust for man is never satisfied. But it is only theoretically true that evil can swallow everything. Some things, when swallowed, begin to work from within and break the inner logic of the "swallower". This can be seen in history: marauding tribes conquer (swallow) a higher civilization and are in turn swallowed up, assimilated into it. It can happen to a person, to an idea. When evil seems to destroy and disfigure, a process begins that has its own dynamics, in which evil is unable to absorb its victim, and the opposite takes place. Thus, when a great idea is gulped down with zest, it can work in unexpected ways and cause unanticipated changes. For instance, the Roman Empire's destruction or swallowing up of Jewish life and ideas eventually became connected with its downfall.
In the larger perspective then, evil cannot really win because it has no substance. The more it swallows, to survive, the more is it liable to crack at some point. "There is a time when one man rules over another to his own hurt," as it is said (Ecclesiastes 8:9). here are two processes at work simultaneously the demonic destructive one of evil and that of Tiqun - but since the evil subsists on the nourishment it gets from the holy, its influence is limited and sooner or later, it would surrender.
We are reminded of the comic story of the proud and successful robber who sent his son to school to learn manners, but the son learned his manners so well that he could not be a robber any more. The process of civilization has its own logic of decency. As the evil swallows the good, it is eventually influenced by the good to its own destruction. In the meantime, it undergoes distortion upon distortion. There is a kind of circuit, like the exchange of merchants' goods, enriching some, impoverishing others, benefiting as well as injuring, but on the whole keeping things going in a certain direction. In the end, of course, "death itself shall be swallowed forever and the Lord God will wipe away tears from all faces; and the disgrace of His people shall He take away from off all the earth" (Isaiah 25:8).

